Today's reading comes from the book of Matthew chapter 25 verses one through 13.
At that time, the kingdom of heaven will be like 10 virgins who took their lamps and went out to meet the bridegroom.
Five of them were foolish and five were wise.
The foolish ones took their lamps but did not take any oil with them.
The wise ones, however, took oil in jars along with their lamps.
The bridegroom was a long time in coming.
and they all became drowsy and fell asleep.
At midnight, the cry rang out, here's the bridegroom, come out to meet him.
Then all the virgins woke up and trimmed their lamps.
The foolish ones said to the wise, give us some of your oil.
Our lamps are going out.
No, they replied.
There may not be enough for the both of us and you.
Instead, go to those who sell oil and buy some for yourselves.
But while they were still on their way to buy oil, the bridegroom arrived.
The virgins who were ready went in with him to the wedding banquet.
The door was shut.
Later, the others also came.
Lord, Lord, they said, open the door for us.
But he replied, truly, I tell you, I don't know you.
Therefore, keep watch because you do not know the day or the hour.
This is the word of the Lord.
Please be seated.
So today, we have a peculiar story.
A wedding is late, but it's late because of the groom.
Shocking, stunning.
What's the latest wedding you've ever been to?
Someone this morning shouted out, eight hours late.
That's outrageous.
I have the great privilege of attending many weddings.
Many of you have attended many weddings.
I've been the officiant at a wedding.
The latest wedding I've ever officiated happened many years ago.
It was a wedding out in BC, the interior of BC.
I was invited to do this wedding for this amazing couple.
I was excited, and we did it, and the bride, she said, we'll do it in my hometown, in the church I grew up in as a little kid.
And it was a Mennonite church.
The Mennonites are a lot of things.
A lot of wonderful things.
I love Mennonites.
The rest of you do not.
But the Mennonites, if they are one thing, they are frugal.
And I love that about them.
They know the value of a dollar.
The only problem is their frugality shows up when they build churches.
And in this church, the frugality meant there was no air conditioning.
And it was 36 degrees Celsius.
And the minutes were clicking by, click, click, click.
And the ladies were wonderful.
They looked great.
They were in their summer dresses, cool, breezy.
And the men were cursed with a suit.
They were melting.
And it became like a barn in there.
So 15 minutes went by.
I'm officiating.
And I come out and I look at,
hundreds of eyes staring out at me and they go, in their mind, I know they're saying, when does this start?
And the information I had was, I don't know.
We're waiting for the bride.
15 minutes later, we're waiting for the bride.
10 minutes later, I came on and said, fact check, we are not waiting for the bride.
It is not the bride's fault.
It's the florist's fault.
She forgot the flowers.
So eventually, an hour later,
Everybody comes in, the bride comes in, half the men have melted into a puddle, but the rest of the wedding went off without a hitch.
What's interesting in this text, Jesus, he's talking about a delayed wedding, and what he's doing is he's setting up his audience to be ready for this wedding that is a long time in the coming.
In context, Jesus is talking about the end of all things, the end of reality,
and the consummation of history.
Where is everything heading?
And then he gives this story to his innermost circle of followers to go, will you be ready?
So that being said, we're gonna pray.
Then we're gonna talk about how do we be ready for the end of history?
How do you be ready?
I invite you to pray with me and let's pray together.
Father, you have
unspeakable joy that you want to pour into the hearts of every man, every woman, every child in this room, watching online.
You have a heart for every person in the city of Calgary, in our nation and the world.
And yet you also give us this story that not everyone is ready for that great day.
So today, Lord, there are people in this room
who are exploring faith, exploring who you are today.
In Jesus' name, would you reveal yourself to them by your grace?
Would you help the people who are exploring to experience you and encounter you?
God, I pray for those in this room who've become weary or embittered and who aren't living in your joy.
They know you, but they've forgotten.
Today, would you set people free?
And Father, there are some in this room who are doing really well.
And they have lots of your joy.
Would you increase it even now in Jesus' name and for His sake?
We pray all this.
Amen.
So if you got a Bible, we're going to be Matthew chapter 25.
We're going to talk about preparing for His presence.
And we're going to talk about, first of all, you will either live prepared or procrastinating.
But I want to give us a little context because this text, Matthew 25, Jesus says the same message three times.
Three times, it says be ready, be ready.
Why does he do that?
Because Jesus knows something about the human heart that you and I forget, and that's this.
When we hear the same message over and over, so it's been a couple of weeks, guess what?
Next week, be ready.
But what can happen in a room like this is we kind of get sleepy.
We get a little docile, we go, yeah, yeah, okay, Jesus said be ready, I'll be ready, and then we don't get ready.
Like how many of us are feeling the rush of Christmas?
You're feeling, oh, somebody raised hands, there's confession in the room, thank you.
How many of you are like, I'm behind?
What did Christmas sneak up on you?
Just a surprise Christmas showed up?
No, it's the very nature of humanity to put off what we should start today.
And so Jesus, he's gonna give this message three times because apparently even, and he's teaching his innermost leaders.
So what that means is for those of you who walked with Jesus for a long time, you're prone to forget too.
I'm prone to forget.
And so Jesus, he's going to set up this contrast that if you're ready, it's a wedding.
Now for some of us, we're like, weddings are sort of perfunctory.
They're not joyful.
But in the ancient Near East, the wedding was the high point of society.
It was a party.
It was joy.
It was music.
It was dancing.
It was food and feasting and family and procreation and sex and joy.
It was everything.
Or locked out in the dark where there's weeping and gnashing of teeth.
See, the problem that I face as a communicator is we get three messages of the same thing in a row.
And so we so easily become docile, sleepy, bored with it.
But Jesus says, you have to understand this, because we do not know the time of the end.
So Jesus, he's been talking.
So here's the setup.
Jesus, he's leaving Jerusalem.
His disciples first followers point out the temple.
He says, the temple's coming down.
The disciples go, then this means a whole new world.
When will the destruction of the temple be?
When will your coming be?
When will be the end of the age?
And Jesus goes, many people will not be ready.
So that's where we pick up.
So he says this, at that time, the kingdom of heaven.
will be like 10 virgins who took their lamps and went out to meet the bridegroom.
Five of them were foolish and five were wise.
The foolish ones took their lamps but did not take any oil with them.
The wise ones, however, took oil in jars along with their lamps.
The bridegroom was a long time incoming and they all became drowsy and fell asleep.
So a couple of things.
Jesus talking about the wrapping up of history.
The final chapter
that leads into the next amazing book, and he talks about the kingdom of heaven.
The problem is when Jesus talks about the kingdom of heaven, most of us, when we think of heaven, the kingdom of heaven, we think of a spiritual world, of spiritual things.
Pie in the sky, when you die, buy and buy.
But we do.
We do a unique thing when we think of the kingdom of God.
We just transform it into this concept.
But for the first followers of Jesus, when they thought of the kingdom of God, they thought the world being put back into order.
The kingdom of God is actually the world, the way it would look if God was in charge.
So for them,
Heaven was earthy, it was the best food, the best feast, the best roads, the best system of government, because God would be king.
It was an earthy reality, and the Christian view of the new earth of heaven is that.
So somehow we got hypnotized, tricked into thinking that spiritual things are not physical things.
In fact, the Bible's so serious about this that when it talks about what happens when you die, if you are in Christ, if you're united to Jesus, they go, you get a whole new body.
For some of us, we should go, whoo, thank you.
I could use a new body.
I feel that even now.
Those of you who are young in the room, you'll find out the rest of us now.
Why would you need a new body?
Because you're going to walk and you're going to hug and you're going to embrace and you're going to eat and feast.
This is the kingdom of God.
It also means the reason why this teaching about the kingdom of God affecting like earthy reality is this.
It means that when you become a Christian, you just don't say a prayer.
Let's get out a jail free card or life insurance for a good eternity after that.
What you are saying is this, you are saying to become a Christian, you are saying Jesus is King.
He's in charge.
And then your life begins to come into alignment with his desires.
And then your life has all kinds of meaning.
Because then your life becomes a little showcase, broken, messed up, but a little showcase of what God is like and what it's like to live with him.
And you, which is crazy, because you're unique.
So your life matters.
So Jesus says, we must be ready for the kingdom.
And the way we get ready is we come into alignment with the king now.
Okay.
So he carries on, says the kingdom of heaven will be like 10 virgins or bridesmaids.
So in the ancient Near East, weddings had three stages.
There was the betrothal.
So what would happen at the betrothal is the families would come together, the bride and groom would meet each other, the parents would meet, and then there would actually be what's called the bride price.
And the bride price had to be paid.
Now sometimes we think that's just because of
a patriarchal system that existed, but it is actually far deeper than that.
In the ancient world, if you had a daughter and your daughter lived with her family, she would do labor.
She brought great value to the family.
If you look in the Old Testament in the book of Genesis, there's this woman named Rachel, who marries this guy named Jacob.
Rachel was a shepherdess.
She did labor.
So when a woman left her family, it left a financial hole.
So the bride price helped to fill that.
So there's a great bride price paid.
Then, for many months, the groom would go home.
And he'd go back to his father's house.
And in his father's house, his job was to prepare a room, a place,
where him and his bride would be together, where they would live together.
And he would prep and work and build and fashion the room, and it would be beautiful.
He would go away to prepare a place for his bride.
And then, and then, at just the right time, the father would come in, and when it was all done, he'd say, it's ready.
Go get her, go.
And then they'd go usually in the evening, early evening,
Not midnight.
The groom and his groomsmen would come to the bride who would be waiting with her bridesmaids and then they would go back home and they'd be together forever.
By the way, when Jesus uses language, Jesus, actually for the church, he calls the church his bride.
Why?
Because on the cross, Jesus Christ paid the price for his bride the church.
Jesus bought you.
He bought you.
He paid all of your debt and bought you out of the kingdom of darkness, into the kingdom of light.
And then Jesus went away.
He went away.
And this is one of the great polemics attacks on Christian faith today.
A lot of people go, hey, how can you believe all this stuff?
That's 2,000 years old, 2,000 years, 2,000.
And Jesus is coming back 2,000 years.
And you can't possibly believe this.
It's been so long.
If it was real, it would have happened already.
A lot of Calgarians think that.
A lot of Canadians think that.
Maybe some of you in the room are going, yeah, that's a good point.
What's interesting is this thought, this argument is not unique at all.
In fact, it was so common that about 30 years after the life, death, and resurrection of Jesus, Peter, the right-hand leader, answers this objection in a letter.
In second Peter, chapter three, it'll be on this screen.
He's talking about people who are mocking the church, mocking people who believe this.
And here's what he says, they will say, where is this coming, he promised?
Ever since our ancestors died, everything goes on as it has since the beginning of creation.
I say, why?
And then he gives the answer.
The Lord is not slow in keeping his promise, as some understand slowness.
Instead, he is patient with you, not wanting anyone to perish, but everyone to come to repentance.
Why has it been 2,000 years?
Why is Jesus waiting 2,000 years?
2,000 years of preparing a room.
That's a long time.
Clean your room.
How long?
2,000 years.
Why did he do it?
Why did he wait 2,000?
He waited for you.
Waiting for you.
He's waiting for you.
He's waiting for me.
He's patient.
so that no one misses the banquet.
So how do we prepare for that banquet?
How do we get ready for his presence?
Here's how it is.
You got these bridesmaids, these virgins.
Five of them were foolish and five were wise.
The message translation says, five were smart and five were silly.
The foolish or silly ones.
Took their lamps but did not take any oil with them.
The wise ones, however, took oil in jars along with their lamps.
The bridegroom was a long time incoming and they all became drowsy and fell asleep.
So we get this contrast.
Jesus lays out this contrast, the smart and the silly, the foolish, the wise.
And he, what's interesting, what would have shocked the readers is this, first hearers.
Everyone fell asleep.
It took till midnight, so everybody went to bed, which is God's way of telling you, you should go to bed before midnight.
No.
What made the person wise or foolish was not that they both did a very normal thing.
They both lived regular lives.
So to be wise and yet waiting means you need to work.
You need to care for your family and your friends and if you're a student to get educated and if you're working to work hard and if you're getting old to plan for retirement and if you need a nap to rest because rest is worship too.
Nothing was different except one group had oil.
One group had oil.
Throughout church history there's been
basically two ways to interpret.
What is this oil?
What is it?
Augustine, St. Augustine, a theologian of Africa, one of the greatest thinkers in human history, he said that the oil was good works.
Good deeds.
The other interpretive option is that the oil
is the power and the presence of the Spirit of God.
Because in the scriptures, oil is used to reference the Holy Spirit that God would actually put His Spirit within you to live a whole new kind of life.
The reason why Augustine said the oil must be, because oil and lamps, in Matthew 5, Jesus, when He talked about having a lamp, that actually you would let your light shine before people so they would see your good deeds and worship your Father in heaven.
So which is it?
What is the oil?
Is it good deeds or is it the Holy Spirit?
I'm going to do the most Canadian thing of all.
Oh, it's terrible.
So Canadian.
Both.
It's both.
Why?
Augustine would have understood this very clearly, but sometimes we forget it.
See, to become a Christian is not just to become a person who pretties up all your bad deeds and does a bunch of good deeds so that God loves you.
Christianity is far more sophisticated.
A handful of years ago, I met with a guy, we'll call him Matt.
And Matt was using magic mushrooms.
Matt had a really bad trip.
He OD'd, had a horrible experience, and he wanted to meet with a pastor so he could pray with somebody.
So we met and prayed and Matt and I kind of struck up a friendship.
And I remember saying to Matt, like, you ever considered giving your life to Jesus Christ?
And he said, yeah, I kind of know what it's all about.
Not really compelled by it.
I just wanted somebody to pray with.
I understand it inside of it.
And I said, Matt, what do you think is the message of Christianity?
He said this, it's basically like,
Don't do bad things and do a bunch of good stuff and then God will love you, right?
I said, Matt, that is like so wrong that I explained to him and I'll share it with you.
Christianity is so much different than religion.
Religion tells you to repent of your bad deeds.
Stop doing the bad things.
Do some good stuff.
God will love you.
He will bless you.
He'll take you to heaven.
He'll give you good karma and you'll reincarnate better.
You'll achieve Nirvana.
Every religion tells you to repent of your bad deeds, but Christianity is the only one that tells you to repent of your good deeds.
Oh, see, that's dangerous.
That's scary.
What does that even mean?
How do you do anything if it's all just bad?
Here's what it means.
Christianity tells you this, that if you do good deeds to impress yourself and others and God, it is repulsive.
that it will turn you into a moral monster.
You'll be full of pride.
You'll know how everyone should live their lives.
They should live it like you, except for the times you don't, that God should love you because you're so great, which robs God as a glory of loving you, even when you're terrible, by the way.
That's why it's so offensive.
When you're terrible and God loves you, it shows you the supremacy of his goodness and grace and holiness, because God loves you when no one else does even yourself.
That's why he's holy.
He's different.
See, when you and I come to God and we go, look at how amazing we are, it's repulsive to Him.
So how do you get this oil then?
How do you get the good stuff?
Here's how.
To become a Christian is to go, God, I'm a foolish bridesmaid, I'm a silly man.
I don't even know how to please you, and I'm sorry.
Forgive me, have mercy.
I wanna go to this banquet thing.
I don't even understand it fully.
And then God does what God loves to do.
He forgives.
He welcomes you in.
He puts his Holy Spirit in you.
And the Holy Spirit inspires you to do good things, to do good things.
Not out of duty, not to impress God.
You don't do good deeds out of duty.
You do them for beauty because you love him.
We've all, maybe not all, many of us have seen the movie, A Christmas Carol.
Ebenezer Scrooge.
He's this miserly old man, loads of money.
He's got this employee, Bob Cratchett, who's got a son who's struggling with health, tiny Tim.
He's got a crotch and it's really rough life.
And Ebenezer Scrooge is just this curmudgeon.
He's just a grouch.
And he's given?
a chance to be saved.
He encounters these spirits of the past and present in future, and he repents, and he gets saved, and at the end of the movie, the end of the movie, he starts doing good all over the place.
He blesses the little boy, he blesses the family, gives Bob Cratch at a raise, he's throwing money away, he blesses his housemaid, and then when everyone's left, you know what he does?
He starts dancing around, he's like, I, and that's the end of that.
He says, I'm the happiest man alive.
And he like messes up his hair and he's like, I don't deserve to be this happy.
That is a picture of the good deeds that are come out of the spirit of God.
That's the picture.
Those are the deeds that prepare us for heaven, preparing for the kingdom.
They're perfectly in alignment.
I'll share an insight of
my own life, see if you can find a parallel.
This is less true of me than it used to be.
But I love preaching.
And sometimes in the past, I think God has really worked on me.
I'd get up and I'd preach and I'd go, that was good.
That was compelling.
That was funny for at least four people.
That was honoring the scripture.
I was good.
I'm good.
What a good person.
Oh, it wasn't that overt.
It was settler.
But I saw all the respectability.
Do you know what that is?
That's me walking in the flesh.
That's me walking and doing good deeds for myself.
You know what the best preaching is for me?
Whereby God's grace I get to go.
Like Ebenezer's Scrooge, I go, I'm the luckiest man alive.
To talk to people about Jesus.
That's walking in the spirit.
Where in your life do you do good deeds in a way that offends God?
Repent.
And let the spirit of God feel you.
To do good.
for love of God and love of neighbor and nothing else.
That's how you get ready.
By the way, that's how you fix so many things.
My worst parenting is done when I'm trying to be a good parent.
My best parenting is done when I go, I love my children, I want the world for them.
My best time in marriage is not when I'm being a good husband.
It's when I go, I just want your best.
That's where the power of God comes in.
Here's the question.
Where are you putting off a life of faith?
For some of us it's the first step going, Jesus, I want your spirit and I want to live this new way.
For some of us it's baptism.
For some of us it's finances.
Where could you walk in the spirit?
All right, let's do the final point.
It's a short one, but a heavy one.
Let's talk about the paradise or peril.
Do something that Canadians don't like now.
We're going to talk about when the door is shut.
We're going to talk about hell and punishment and judgment.
Here's what it says.
At midnight, it's really late.
The cry right now, here's the bridegroom.
Come out to meet him.
then all the virgins woke up and trimmed their lamps.
The foolish ones said to the wise, give us some of your oil.
Our lamps are going out.
No, they replied.
There may be enough for both us.
There may not be enough for both us and you.
Instead, go to those who sell oil and buy some for yourselves.
Friends, no one can give you the spirit except for Jesus Christ.
No one can live the good deeds for you.
except through the power of the Holy Spirit.
It doesn't matter what family you were born into.
Your parents did not give you a faith that you could inherit.
You must have your own oil.
No one can give you theirs.
But while they were on their way to buy the oil, the bridegroom arrived.
The virgins who were ready went in with him to the wedding banquet
and the most harrowing words of all.
And then the door was shut.
Jesus very clearly says this.
At the end of all history, there will be the banquet.
And there will be a locked door.
and the banquet will be life without cancer and without injury and without disease and without anxiety and depression.
It will be a life where work works.
You go to Ikean by a shelf and it says two hours to put together and you do it in 30 minutes.
And even if it took five hours, you wouldn't even care, you'd have that much character.
All in the food is gonna be outrageous and there's gonna be dancing and music and joy and we're gonna invent
and create the paintings are going to be outrageous.
Oh, it'll be life evermore.
Every tear.
Here's the problems.
Every tear will be wiped away.
And there'll be no more death and no more mourning.
And you get a new body and it'll never break down.
Or the door is shut and it's weeping and gnashing of teeth and darkness.
Are you ready?
And some of you are saying, how could a good and loving God shut the door and lock it?
How could he say to them like he does, I never knew you?
How could he be good?
Here's how.
If he doesn't lock the door and if he doesn't shut the door, guess what happens?
The same corrosive virus of sin enters into that whole new reality and starts twisting and breaking it, and we live in a world just like this one.
Everything evil has to be locked out.
Everything broken has to be locked out.
See, to become a Christian is to say, God, take the evil out of me.
I'm sorry.
I'm worse than I think.
You are worse than you think.
Let me just be more offensive because we're here already.
The cross of Jesus Christ is you are more wretched and wicked and awful and evil than you dare to admit.
And it also says this, you are more loved and desired and cared for and blessed in Christ than you could ever hope to imagine.
And to become a Christian and say, God have mercy, save me.
And he goes, good.
We have some surgery to do.
We have some rehab to do.
We have some physio to do.
And I'm going to walk with you for your whole life through the presence of my Holy Spirit.
And I'll take you one day longer than the rest of your life to get it all done.
But then at the end of it all, you become the person you were meant to be.
Free of sin and in forever.
So if you're here and you've never
entered in.
You don't have any oil.
The great news.
He's patient.
The door's not locked.
The bridegroom is slow and coming.
He's been taking his time.
He's waiting for you.
Today is your day to give your life to Jesus Christ.
We must know.
There are people we love who right now are standing on the outside of that door.
If you're here in your Christian, we're going to pray for them.
If you're a Christian, you're going to repent of your good deeds that are done for yourself.
And we're asked the spirit to fill you afresh.
But if you're here and you've never given your life to Christ, today's a great day to go.
I want in on this banquet.
I don't understand the half of it.
Here's the great news.
It's not your understanding that saves you.
It's God's grace.
So let's pray.
I'm gonna pray in three ways, pray to receive Jesus, pray for people who don't know Jesus, and then pray that God would make our good deeds glorious deeds, done for him and him only.
Let's pray.
If you're here and you've never experienced Jesus, you've never prayed to receive Christ.
We're gonna pray and you can repeat in your head and your heart.
The prayer isn't magic.
It's an invitation for God to have grace and mercy on you, and he loves to do that.
So here's the prayer.
Jesus forgive me for all my failures.
Give me faith, I trust you.
Make me a part of the family of God.
Bring me to the banquet, please.
I give you my worst parts of my life.
And then I give you the rest of my life.
Please lead me.
and put your Holy Spirit within me, and give me eternal life, please.
Second prayer, we're just gonna ask the Lord to bring somebody to mind who doesn't know him, someone we love desperately.
And we're gonna pray that God would open their eyes, that he'd have mercy on them.
It's a very simple prayer.
So get a name, ask God for a name.
Maybe you already have one in your mind.
And here's the prayer.
It's really easy.
God have mercy on, and then fill in the blank.
So God have mercy on Shane.
The second part of the prayer is we're just gonna simply ask the Spirit of God, how could we help that person?
Meet Jesus.
So Spirit, would you show us how to help?
Just let them bring thoughts to mind, maybe a scripture.
And third prayer.
We're gonna ask for a fresh filling of the oil, of the Holy Spirit that we could live beautiful lives for God's glory, not our own.
So here's the prayer.
Come Holy Spirit.
Fill us, fill me in Jesus' name.
Forgive us for the times we've sought our glory and not yours.
and Spirit fill us so that we will be ready for you and we will be ready to share the good news of the coming of the Lord Jesus at Christmas and His coming once more.
We pray all this in Jesus' beautiful name.
Amen.